Rule 1: For Every Result, Keep Track of How It Was Produced 
 Whenever a result may be of potential interest, keep track of how it was produced. When doing this, one will frequently find that getting from raw data to the final result involves many interrelated steps (single commands, scripts, programs). We refer to such a sequence of steps, whether it is automated or performed manually, as an analysis workflow. While the essential part of an analysis is often represented by only one of the steps, the full sequence of pre- and post-processing steps are often critical in order to reach the achieved result. For every involved step, you should ensure that every detail that may influence the execution of the step is recorded. If the step is performed by a computer program, the critical details include the name and version of the program, as well as the exact parameters and inputs that were used. 
 Although manually noting the precise sequence of steps taken allows for an analysis to be reproduced, the documentation can easily get out of sync with how the analysis was really performed in its final version. By instead specifying the full analysis workflow in a form that allows for direct execution, one can ensure that the specification matches the analysis that was (subsequently) performed, and that the analysis can be reproduced by yourself or others in an automated way. Such executable descriptions  [10]  might come in the form of simple shell scripts or makefiles  [15] ,  [16]  at the command line, or in the form of stored workflows in a workflow management system  [10] ,  [11] ,  [13] ,  [17] ,  [18] . 
 As a minimum, you should at least record sufficient details on programs, parameters, and manual procedures to allow yourself, in a year or so, to approximately reproduce the results. Rule 2: Avoid Manual Data Manipulation Steps 
 Whenever possible, rely on the execution of programs instead of manual procedures to modify data. Such manual procedures are not only inefficient and error-prone, they are also difficult to reproduce. If working at the UNIX command line, manual modification of files can usually be replaced by the use of standard UNIX commands or small custom scripts. If working with integrated frameworks, there will typically be a quite rich collection of components for data manipulation. As an example, manual tweaking of data files to attain format compatibility should be replaced by format converters that can be reenacted and included into executable workflows. Other manual operations like the use of copy and paste between documents should also be avoided. If manual operations cannot be avoided, you should as a minimum note down which data files were modified or moved, and for what purpose. Rule 3: Archive the Exact Versions of All External Programs Used
